---
layout: page
title: Release Process
weight: 2
---

The process below applies to both Meltano and then SDK, unless otherwise noted.

## Evergreen Release Process

We are always releasing, and we aim to have an _evergreen_ release process, handling the operational release and marketing work simultaneously while performing development.

## Schedule

The release schedule is determined by Product and Marketing. The Engineering team aims to _always_ be ready to ship, with sufficient automation and documentation in place to allow _anyone_ in the company to perform the role of Release Manager.

## Rotating Release Managers

We have a sliding window of `Release Manager` role within the Engineering team, with the prior `Release Manager` on call to support the next `Release Manager`. If issues arise or a second opinion is needed during release, the last person who ran the release process will perform this supporting function for the next.

## Versioning

Regular releases get a minor version bump (`1.1.0` ⇾ `1.2.0`).
Releases that only address regressions introduced in the most recent release get a patch version bump (`1.2.0` ⇾ `1.2.1`).

## Release process

### Basic overview

Current as of: Aug 2022

The process between releasing the SDK and Meltano are essentially the same, and at the high level consistent off:

1. Triggering the version bump GitHub workflow
2. Verifying and grooming the auto-generated changelog contained in the PR generated by the GitHub workflow
3. Merging the PR
4. Grooming the releases notes on the draft release in GitHub
5. Publishing the draft release in GitHub (which automatically ships to PyPi)
6. Execution of the Docker Publish workflow (only required for a Meltano release)

The release process is fairly automated, but there are a few manual steps that require careful user attention, namely when it comes to grooming the changelog and adding author attribution.

### Release process in detail

Note: An excellent walkthrough of the GitHub portion of the releases process is available as a [recording in zoom](https://meltano.zoom.us/rec/play/ORP7_YqAfOf7cO1QlzpBgQvzE03sUGWwgaqVM3l73J6Bv4ZNobGHkpBYunfcsbDSZ4EArSQwmWr9sQ2M.sci0rE6xMAfSNMVG?continueMode=true&_x_zm_rtaid=20Z-pMoDQgy0DmRPcCaVvQ.1659731481077.bf202a39d17b8ca28a159b9671132651&_x_zm_rhtaid=985)

#### Triggering the version bump

The first step to a release regardless of whether is the SDK or Meltano is to trigger a version bump. To do so, you'll manually trigger the Version Bump GitHub action: https://github.com/meltano/sdk/actions/workflows/version_bump.yml

Selecting options:
- Version bump type: `patch` or `minor` (`major` will be used rarely)
- Increase to this prerelease version: none

This will:

- Create a Version Bump PR with an auto-generated changelog update
- Create a draft release and tag on GitHub

#### Reviewing/Merge the Version Bump PR

Triggering a version bump will create a PR like [!891](https://github.com/meltano/sdk/pull/891). You'll need to review this PR and:

- Check version bump to ensure that the version bump worked correctly, and the new version appears as you would expect.
- Groom the changelog:
  - Checking explicitly for missing entries.
  - Checking for missing or incorrectly linked PR and Issue refs.
  - Linking to issues rather than PR's where appropriate.
  - Moving issue/pr reference's to the head of the line AND making them valid Markdown links.
  - Generally ensure the format adheres to previous changelog convention and entries.
  - Thanking contributors when the PR originated from a Meltano contributor rather than core developer.

Once the change log is groomed, go ahead and copy the raw (markdown) change log contents and use it to update the description of the Draft release corresponding to your version bump on the GitHub releases page (e.g. https://github.com/meltano/sdk/releases). DO NOT publish the release notes.

Once the changelog is groomed, and you're happy with its state, merge the PR.

#### Release notes and Marketing

Once you've merged the version bump PR and copied the description to the draft release, ping AJ Steers and Taylor Murphy in the marketing Slack channel, asking them to review the release notes. 
Be sure to merge the release PR Before publishing the Release. **Publishing the release before the version bump PR has landed will cause the PyPi action to fail**.

Publishing the release will trigger the PyPi release.

--

If the release is published before the version bump PR has landed, you will need to start over (don't forget to stash your groomed changelog somewhere so that you can paste it back in). In this scenario:

- Close the Release PR
- Delete the Release AND Tag
- Verify that the PR is closed, the Release is deleted, and the Tag is deleted. Having any three of these remaining will likely cause issues moving forward
- Start the process a new by triggering **the same** version bump again. You do not need to skip a version

#### Meltano - Docker Publish

When releasing Meltano, there's one additional step. You'll need to build/publish images to the Docker hub. 

After publishing the Meltano draft, and after you've verified that the packages are live on PyPi, you will need to trigger the Docker publish action: https://github.com/meltano/meltano/actions/workflows/docker_publish.yml

Selecting options:

- Use workflow from: `branch: main`
- Where to upload the images: `docker.io`
- Optionally selecting `dry-run` will skip the upload stage.

#### Comms

Coordinating with the `#marketing` Slack channel, post a release announcement in the `#announcements` Slack channel.